content/publication/2020/rabies_infection_dynamics/index.md, before:

---
title: "Dynamics of viral index infections in novel hosts"
authors:
- Nardus Mollentze
- Daniel Streicker
- Pablo Murcia
- Katie Hampson
- Roman Biek

date: "2020-04-10"
doi: "10.1101/2020.04.09.033928"

# Schedule page publish date (NOT publication's date).
publishDate: "2020-04-10T00:00:00Z"

# Publication type.
# Legend: 0 = Uncategorized; 1 = Conference paper; 2 = Journal article;
# 3 = Preprint / Working Paper; 4 = Report; 5 = Book; 6 = Book section;
# 7 = Thesis; 8 = Patent
publication_types: ["3"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated publication name.
publication: "*biorXiv*"
publication_short: "biorXiv preprint"

abstract: Whether a pathogen entering a new host species results in a single infection or in onward transmission, and potentially an outbreak, depends upon the progression of infection in the index case. Although index infections are rarely observable in nature, experimental inoculations of pathogens into novel host species have a long history in biomedical research. This provides a rich and largely unexploited data source for meta-analyses to identify the host and pathogen determinants of variability in infection outcomes. Here, we analysed the progressions of 514 experimental cross-species inoculations of rabies virus, a widespread zoonotic pathogen which in nature exhibits both dead end infections and varying levels of sustained transmission in novel hosts. Inoculations originating from bats rather than carnivores, and from warmer to cooler-bodied species caused infections with shorter incubation periods that were associated with diminished virus excretion. Inoculations between distantly related hosts tended to result in shorter clinical disease periods, which will also impede transmission. All effects were modulated by infection dose and together suggest that increased virulence as host species become more dissimilar is the limiting factor preventing onward transmission. These results explain observed constraints on rabies virus host shifts, allow us to evaluate the risk of novel reservoirs establishing, and give mechanistic insights into why host shifts are less likely between genetically distant species. More generally, our study highlights meta-analyses of experimental infections as a tractable approach to quantify the complex interactions between virus, reservoir, and novel host that shape the outcome of cross-species transmission.

# Summary. An optional shortened abstract.
summary:  Why most cross-species transmissions fail to establish ongoing transmission in the newly infected species remains poorly understood. Examining cross-species inoculations involving rabies, we show that mismatches in virulence which are predictable from host and viral factors make sustained transmission in the novel host less likely. These  mechanistic  insights  help  to explain  and predict  host  shift  events and highlight  meta-analyses  of  existing  experimental inoculation data as a powerful and generalisable approach for understanding the dynamics of index infections in novel species.

tags:
- cross-species transmission
- viruses
- rabies
- comparative
- meta-analysis
- phylogenetic glmm


featured: true

# links:
# - name: ""
#   url: ""
url_pdf: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.09.033928v1.full.pdf
url_code: https://zenodo.org/record/3746610
url_dataset: https://zenodo.org/record/3746610
url_poster: ''
url_project: ''
url_slides: ''
url_source: ''
url_video: ''

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: true

# Associated Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `internal-project` references `content/project/internal-project/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects: []`.
projects: []

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this publication with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides: "example"` references `content/slides/example/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides: ""`.
slides: ""
---

{{< altmetric "10.1101/2020.04.09.033928" >}}

Commit message:

Add datasets section
Reservoirs + rabies shiny app

content/publication/2020/rabies_infection_dynamics/index.md, after:

---
title: "Virulence mismatches in index hosts shape the outcomes of cross-species transmission"
authors:
- Nardus Mollentze
- Daniel Streicker
- Pablo Murcia
- Katie Hampson
- Roman Biek

date: "2020-04-10"
doi: "10.1101/2020.04.09.033928"

# Schedule page publish date (NOT publication's date).
publishDate: "2020-04-10T00:00:00Z"

# Publication type.
# Legend: 0 = Uncategorized; 1 = Conference paper; 2 = Journal article;
# 3 = Preprint / Working Paper; 4 = Report; 5 = Book; 6 = Book section;
# 7 = Thesis; 8 = Patent
publication_types: ["2"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated publication name.
publication: "*Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, (in press)"
publication_short: PNAS

abstract: Whether a pathogen entering a new host species results in a single infection or in onward transmission, and potentially an outbreak, depends upon the progression of infection in the index case. Although index infections are rarely observable in nature, experimental inoculations of pathogens into novel host species provide a rich and largely unexploited data source for meta-analyses to identify the host and pathogen determinants of variability in infection outcomes. We analysed the progressions of 514 experimental cross-species inoculations of rabies virus, a widespread zoonosis which in nature exhibits both dead end infections and varying levels of sustained transmission in novel hosts. Inoculations originating from bats rather than carnivores, and from warmer to cooler-bodied species caused infections with shorter incubation periods that were associated with diminished virus excretion. Inoculations between distantly related hosts tended to result in shorter clinical disease periods, which are also expected to impede onward transmission. All effects were modulated by infection dose. Taken together, these results suggest that as host species become more dissimilar, increased virulence might act as a limiting factor preventing onward transmission. These results can explain observed constraints on rabies virus host shifts, describe a previously unrecognised role of host body temperature, and provide a potential explanation for host shifts being less likely between genetically distant species. More generally, our study highlights meta-analyses of experimental infections as a tractable approach to quantify the complex interactions between virus, reservoir, and novel host that shape the outcome of cross-species transmission.

# Summary. An optional shortened abstract.
summary:  Why most cross-species transmissions fail to establish ongoing transmission in the newly infected species remains poorly understood. Examining cross-species inoculations involving rabies, we show that mismatches in virulence which are predictable from host and viral factors make sustained transmission in the novel host less likely. These mechanistic insights help to explain and predict host shift events and highlight meta-analyses of existing experimental inoculation data as a powerful and generalisable approach for understanding the dynamics of index infections in novel species.

tags:
- cross-species transmission
- viruses
- rabies
- comparative
- meta-analysis
- phylogenetic glmm


featured: true

# links:
# - name: ""
#   url: ""
url_pdf: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.09.033928v1.full.pdf
url_code: https://zenodo.org/record/3746609
url_dataset: https://zenodo.org/record/3746609
url_poster: ''
url_project: ''
url_slides: ''
url_source: ''
url_video: ''

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: true

# Associated Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `internal-project` references `content/project/internal-project/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects: []`.
projects: []

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this publication with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides: "example"` references `content/slides/example/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides: ""`.
slides: ""
---

{{< altmetric "10.1101/2020.04.09.033928" >}}
